---
title: 'Measure Theoretic Probability Part 1'
date: 2026-06-07T07:07:07+01:00
slug: measure_theoretic_probability_part_1
math: 'mathjax'
---

UPDATE 06/11/2026: Started adding solutions to problems.

I've recently been reading Billingsley's *Probability and Measure
Theory*. I wanted to write down some notes I've been taking. In a
separate post I'll also include my solutions to some of the chapters
since the book doesn't provide complete solutions for all
problems. This will likely be a series. This will contain notes for
Chapter 2 and solutions to some of the problems. In general, for each
article, I'll provide both notes and solutions and update them as I
read further into the section and/or complete more problems. As a side
note, since I'm trying to summarize important facts, I will not always
include proofs for everything (though this might change as I update an
article). I'll try to include updates/edits at the top of the article.


# Probability Measures and Fields

A *probability triple* is a tuple $(\Omega, \mathcal{F}, P)$ where
$\Omega$ is a set, $\mathcal{F}$ is a *field*, and $P$ is a set
function from $\mathcal{F}$ into $\mathbb{R}$. A *field* $\mathcal{F}$
is a collection (or "class") of sets that satisfies the following:

1.  $\Omega \in \mathcal{F}$
2.  If $A \in \mathcal{F}$, then $A^c \in \mathcal{F}$
3.  Let $A_1, A_2, ..., A_N \in \mathcal{F}$ be a finite collection of
    sets. Then, $\bigcup_{n=1}^N A_n \in \mathcal{F}$.

The set function $P$ is a *probability measure* that satisfies the
following:

1.  $0 \le P(A) \le 1$ for $A \in \mathcal{F}$
2.  $P(\emptyset) = 0$, $P(\Omega) = 1$
3.  If $A_1, A_2, ..., \text{etc}$ is a disjoint sequence of $\mathcal{F}$-sets and
    if $\bigcup_{k=1}^N A_k$, then $P(\cup_{k=1}^\infty A_k) =
       \sum_{k=1}^\infty P(A_k)$. That is, $P$ is *countably additive*.

This necessarily implies that $P$ is *finitely additive* as well,
since we can take the first $N$ sets as $A_1, ..., A_N$, and then let
$A_k = \emptyset$ for $k > N$.


# &sigma;-Fields

A $\sigma$ *-field* is a field that satisfies the following conditions:

1.  $\Omega \in \mathcal{F}$
2.  If $A \in \mathcal{F}$, then $A^c \in \mathcal{F}$.
3.  Let $\{A_n\}_{n=1}^\infty$ is a sequence of
    $\mathcal{F}$-sets. Then, $\bigcup_{n=1}^\infty A_n \in
       \mathcal{F}$

In other words, the primary difference between a $\sigma$ -field and an
ordinary field is that a $\sigma$ -field is **closed under countable
unions** whereas ordinary fields are only **closed under finite
unions**.

Let $\mathcal{A}$ be a class of subsets of $\Omega$. Then, the
$\sigma$ *-field generated by* $\mathcal{A}$, denoted
$\sigma(\mathcal{A})$, is the intersection of all $\sigma$ fields that
contain $\mathcal{A}$. We have the two following facts:

1.  $\sigma(\mathcal{A})$ is a $\sigma$ -field.
2.  Let $\mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{G}$, where $\mathcal{G}$ is a
    $\sigma$ -field. Then, $\sigma(\mathcal{A}) \subset \mathcal{G}$.

We can first prove (1): We can write $\sigma(\mathcal{A}) =
\bigcap_{\mathcal{A} \subset F} F$, where the sets $F$ are $\sigma$
-fields that contain $A$. Since each set $F$ is a $\sigma$ -field,
$\Omega \in F$, so $\Omega \in \bigcap_{\mathcal{A} \subset F} F$ as
well. Let $A \in \sigma(\mathcal{A})$. So then Then,
$A \in F$ for all $\sigma$ -fields $F$ that contain
$\mathcal{A}$. Since $F$ is a $\sigma$ -field, that implies $A^c \in
F$, so $A^c \in \bigcap_{\mathcal{A} \subset F} F =
\sigma(\mathcal{A})$. Let $\{A_n\}_{n=1}^\infty$ be
a sequence of sets in $\sigma(\mathcal{A})$. Since $A_n \in
\bigcap_{\mathcal{A} \subset F} F$ for all $n \in \mathbb{N}$, that
means that $A_n \in F$ for every $F$ containing $\mathcal{A}$ and for
all $n \in \mathbb{N}$. Then, for every $F$ containing $\mathcal{A}$,
$\cup_{n=1}^\infty A_n \in F$ since $F$ is a $\sigma$
-field. Consequently, $\cup_{n=1}^\infty A_n \in \sigma(\mathcal{A})$.
Now we can prove (2): Suppose that $\mathcal{A} \subset \mathcal{G}$,
and $\mathcal{G}$ is a $\sigma$ -field. Then, since $G$ is a $\sigma$
-field containing $\mathcal{A}$, it is one of the fields $F$ in the
intersection $\bigcap_{\mathcal{G} \subset F} F =
\sigma(\mathcal{A})$. This implies that $\sigma(\mathcal{A}) \subset
\sigma(\mathcal{G})$. This finishes our proof of the two preceding
facts. Note that the second fact shows that the $\sigma$ -field
generated by $\mathcal{A}$ is the smallest $\sigma$ -field containing $\mathcal{A}$.


# Important Properties of Probability Measure

1.  Countable Subadditivity: If $\{A_n\}_{n=1}^\infty$ is a sequence of
    $\mathcal{F}$ -sets and $\cup_{k=1}^\infty A_k \in \mathcal{F}$ ,
    then $P(\cup_{k=1}^\infty A_k) \le \sum_{k=1}^\infty P(A_k)$.
2.  The Lebesgue measure $\lambda$ is a countably additive probability
    measure on the field $\mathcal{B}_0$. Here, the field
    $\mathcal{B}_0$ is the field consisting of finite disjoint unions
    of subintervals of $(0, 1] = \Omega$. If $A \in \mathcal{B}_0$,
    then we can write $A = \cup_{n=1}^N I_n$ where the $I_n$ are
    pairwise disjoint intervals in $(0, 1]$. Then, $\lambda(A) :=
       \sum_{n=1}^N \lambda(I_n) = \sum_{n=1}^N |I_n|$.
3.  Let $\{A_n\}_{n=1}^\infty$ be a sequence of
    $\mathcal{F}$-sets. Suppose that $A_n \subset A_{n+1}$ ($A_n
       \supset A_{n+1}$). Let $A = \cup_{n=1}^\infty A_n$ and $A \in
       \mathcal{F}$. Then, $P(A_n) \uparrow P(A)$ ($P(A_n) \downarrow P(A)$).


# Sequence Spaces

TODO


# Solutions to Problems in Chapter 2


## Problem 2.2

Let $x \in U_k$. Then, there exists indices $1 \le i_1 \le \dots \le
i_k \le n$ such that $x \in \cap_{j=1}^k A_{ij}$. Note that we can
write:
$$

\begin{align*}
I_{n-k+1} &= \bigcap \bigcup_{j=1}^{n-k+1} A_{j} \\
&= \bigcap \bigcup_{j \in [n] \setminus \{i_1, ..., i_{k-1}\}} A_{j}
\end{align*}

$$
Basically, there is a one-to-one correspondence between the $n-k+1$
tuples and removing a $k$ -tuple from an $n$ tuple (e.g, the numbers
from $1, \dots, n$). Since $x$ belongs to $k$ sets and each term of
the intersection only removes $k-1$ sets, $x$ must be in each union
and hence $x \in I_{n-k+1}$ : if $x$ were not in one of the  $\bigcup_{j \in [n]
\setminus \{i_1, \dots, i_{k-1}\}} A_j$, then $x$ would belong to less
than $k$ sets, which contradicts the fact that $x \in U_k$. This shows
that $U_k \subset I_{n-k+1}$. Now, suppose that $x \in I_{n-k+1}$. So,
$x$ belongs to at least $k$ sets of the $n$ sets $A_1, \dots,
A_n$. Therefore, $x \in U_k$.


## Problem 2.3

Part A: First, $\Omega \in \mathcal{F}$. Then, if $A \in \mathcal{F}$, then
$\Omega - A = A^c \in \mathcal{F}$. Let $\{A_k\}_{k=1}^n$ be a
sequence of $\mathcal{F}$ -sets. Since $A_1^c \in \mathcal{F}$,
$A_1^c-A_2 = A_1^c \cap A_2^c \in \mathcal{F}$. In general,
$\cap_{k=1}^n A_k^c \in \mathcal{F}$. Then, $\cup_{k=1}^n A_k =
\Bigl(\cup_{k=1}^n A_k^c \Bigl)^c \in \mathcal{F}$. So, $\mathcal{F}$
is a field.

Part B: Let $\mathcal{F} = \{\emptyset, \{1,2,3,4\}, \{1,2\}, \{1,3\},
\{1,4\}, \{2,3\}, \{2,4\}, \{3,4\}\}$. This is closed under disjoint
finite unions but $\{1, 3\} \cup \{2, 3\} = \{1, 2, 3\} \not\in
\mathcal{F}$.


## Problem 2.4

Part A: Since $\Omega \in \mathcal{F}$ for all $n \in \mathbb{N}$,
$\Omega \in \cup_{n=1}^\infty \mathcal{F}_n$. Let $A \in
\cup_{n=1}^\infty \mathcal{F}_n$. Then, $A \in \mathcal{F}_n$ for all
$n \in \mathbb{N}$. Then, $A^c \in \mathcal{F}_n$. So, $A^c \in
\cup_{n=1}^\infty \mathcal{F}_n$. Let $\{A_k\}_{k=1}^m$ be a sequence
of sets such that $A_k \in \cup_{n=1}^\infty \mathcal{F}_n$. Let $i_1,
..., i_m$ be indices such that $A_k \in F_{i_k}$ for all $k \in
[m]$. Choose $i_j = \max\{i_1, ..., i_m\}$. Then, $A_j \in \mathcal{F}_{i_j}$
and for all $i_k \le i_j$, $\mathcal{F}_{i_k} \subset
\mathcal{F}_{i_j}$, so $A_k \in \mathcal{F}_{i_j}$ for all $k \in
[m]$. So, $\cup_{k=1}^m A_k \in \mathcal{F}_{i_j}$ which implies that
$\cup_{k=1}^m A_k \in \cup_{n=1}^\infty \mathcal{F}_n$.

Part B: Let $\mathcal{F}_n$ be a $\sigma$ -field over all $2^n$
subsets of elements from $1$ to $n$. Then, $\mathcal{F}_n \subset
\mathcal{F}_{n+1}$. Let $A_n = \{n\}$. Then, $A_k \in \mathcal{F}_k$
for all $k \in \mathbb{N}$. So we cannot say that $\cup_{n} A_n \in
\cup_{n} \mathcal{F}_n$.


## Problem 2.5

Part A: Let $\{F_\alpha\}$ be the set of all fields in $\Omega$
containing $\mathcal{A}$. Then, $f(\mathcal{A}) = \cap_\alpha
F_\alpha$. Since $\Omega \in F_\alpha$ for all $\alpha$, $\Omega \in
f(\mathcal{A})$. Let $B \in \cap_\alpha F_\alpha$. Then, $B \in
F_\alpha$ for all $\alpha$, so $B^c \in F_\alpha$. This implies that
$B^c \in F_\alpha$. Then, $B^c \in \cap_\alpha F_\alpha$, so $B^c \in
f(\mathcal{A})$. Now, let $A_1, \dots, A_n \in \cap_\alpha
F_\alpha$. Then, $A_k \in F_\alpha$ for all $\alpha$ and for all $k
\in [n]$. Then, $\cup_{k=1}^n A_k \in F_\alpha$ for all $\alpha$. So,
$\cup_{k=1}^n A_k \in \cap_\alpha F_\alpha$. Therefore,
$f(\mathcal{A})$ is a field. Let $B \in \mathcal{A}$. Then, since $\mathcal{A}
\subset F_\alpha$ for all $\alpha$, $B \in F_\alpha$ for all
$\alpha$. Hence, $B \in \cap_\alpha F_\alpha = f(\mathcal{A})$. Now we
show that $f(\mathcal{A})$ is the smallest field containing
$\mathcal{A}$. Let $\mathcal{G}$ be a field and $\mathcal{A} \subset
\mathcal{G}$. Then, $\mathcal{G} \in \{F_\alpha\}$. So, $f(\mathcal{A}) =
\cap_\alpha F_\alpha \subset \mathcal{G}$.

Part B: BACKLOG


## Problem 2.6

Part A: $f(\mathcal{A})$ consists of the intersection of all fields containing
$\mathcal{A}$. Since these are fields, all finite unions of singletons
will be present. So, $f(\mathcal{A})$ consists of all finite sets
produced by the singletons. Moreover, it also consists of all cofinite
sets since it is closed under complementation. So, $f(\mathcal{A})$ is
the field in Example 2.3.

Part B: Since $\mathcal{A} \subset \sigma(\mathcal{A})$,
$\sigma(\mathcal{A}) \in \{F_\alpha\}_\alpha$ where the $F_\alpha$ are
fields that contain $\mathcal{A}$. Therefore, $f(\mathcal{A}) =
\cap_\alpha F_\alpha \subset \sigma(\mathcal{A})$. Suppose
$\mathcal{A}$ is finite. Then, $\sigma(\mathcal{A})$ is the
intersection of all $\sigma$ -fields containing $\mathcal{A}$. Let $A
\in \sigma(\mathcal{A})$. All the fields $F_\alpha \supset
\mathcal{A}$ contain only finite unions and intersections of elements
of $\mathcal{A}$ since $\mathcal{A}$ is finite. So, $F_\alpha$ is also
a $\sigma$ -field. Therefore, $\sigma(\mathcal{A}) \subset
f(\mathcal{A})$. This implies $f(\mathcal{A}) =
\sigma(\mathcal{A})$. Now we show that $\sigma(f(\mathcal{A})) =
\sigma(\mathcal{A})$. Since $A \subset f(\mathcal{A}) \subset
\sigma(f(\mathcal{A}))$ and $\sigma(f(\mathcal{A}))$ is a field,
$\sigma(f(\mathcal{A}))$, $\sigma(\mathcal{A}) \subset
\sigma(f(\mathcal{A}))$ by the minimality of $\sigma(\mathcal{A})$. We
showed that $f(\mathcal{A}) \subset \sigma(\mathcal{A})$, and since
$\sigma(\mathcal{A})$ is a field, $\sigma(f(\mathcal{A})) \subset
\sigma(\mathcal{A})$ by the minimality of $\sigma(f(\mathcal{A}))$.

Part C: Let $\mathcal{A}$ be countable. By 2.5 (b),  $f(\mathcal{A})$
is the class of sets $\cup_{i=1}^m \cap_{j=1}^{n_i} A_{ij}$ where each
$A_{ij} \in \mathcal{A}$ or $A_{ij}^c \in \mathcal{A}$ and where the
$m$ sets $\cap_{j=1}^{n_i} A_{ij}$, $1 \le i \le m$, are disjoint. To
construct all the sets in $f(\mathcal{A})$, we just need to choose
elements of $\mathcal{A}$ and set $A_{ij}$ accordingly. Since there
are countably many such elements of $\mathcal{A}$, there are countably
many sets of $f(\mathcal{A})$ as well, since there are countably many
finite unions and finite intersections of elements in $\mathcal{A}$.

Part D: By 2.5 (b), $f(F_1 \cup F_2)$ will consist of sets of the form
$\cup_{i=1}^m \cap_{j=1}^{n_i} A_{ij}$ where $A_{ij} \in F_1 \cup
F_2$ or $A_{ij}^c \in F_1 \cup F_2$ and $\cap_{j=1}^{n_i} A_{ij}$, $i
\in [m]$, are disjoint. Since each $A_{ij} \in F_1$ or $A_{ij}^c \in
F_1$ or $A_{ij} \in F_2$ or $A_{ij}^c \in F_2$, we can write:
$$

\begin{align*}
\cap_{j=1}^{n_i} A_{ij} \\
&= \Bigl(\cap_{A_{ij} \in F_1} A_{ij}\Bigl) \cap \Bigl(\cap_{A_{ij} \in F_2} A_{ij}\Bigl) \cap \Bigl(\cup_{A_{ij}^c \in F_1} A_{ij}^c \Bigl)^c \cap \Bigl(\cup_{A_{ij}^c \in F_1} A_{ij}^c\Bigl)^c \\
&= A \cap B
\end{align*}

$$

where $A = \Bigl(\cap_{A_{ij} \in F_1} A_{ij}\Bigl) \cap
\Bigl(\cup_{A_{ij}^c \in F_1} A_{ij}\Bigl)^c$ and $B$ is defined
analogously with $F_2$ in the place of $F_1$.


## Problem 2.7

Using 2.5 (b), $f(\mathcal{F} \cup H)$ consists of sets of the form
$\cup_{i=1}^m \cap_{j=1}^{n_i} A_{ij}$ where $A_{ij} \in \mathcal{F}
\cup H$ or $A_{ij}^c \in \mathcal{F} \cup H$ and where the sets
$\cap_{i=1}^{n_i} A_{ij}$ are disjoint. Then, we can write:
$$

\begin{align*}
\cap_{j=1}^{n_i} A_{ij} &= \bigcap_{A_{ij} \in \mathcal{F}} A_{ij} \cap
\bigcap_{A_{ij}^c \in \mathcal{F}} A_{ij} \cap \bigcap_{A_{ij} \in \{H\}} A_{ij}
\cap \bigcap_{A_{ij}^c \in \{H\}} A_{ij} \\
&= \Bigl(\bigcap_{A_{ij} \in \mathcal{F}} A_{ij} \cap \bigcap_{A_{ij}^c \in \mathcal{F}} A_{ij} \cap H\Bigl) \text{ or } \Bigl(\bigcap_{A_{ij} \in \mathcal{F}} A_{ij} \cap \bigcap_{A_{ij}^c \in \mathcal{F}} A_{ij}^c \cap H^c \Bigl)
\end{align*}

$$
since if $A_{ij} = H$ and $A_{ik}^c = H$ for some $j, k \in [n_i]$,
then the intersection is empty. Note that we can write:
$$

\begin{align*}
\bigcap_{A_{ij} \in \mathcal{F}} A_{ij} \cap \bigcap_{A_{ij}^c \in \mathcal{F}} A_{ij} &= \bigcap_{A_{ij} \in \mathcal{F}} A_{ij} \cap \Bigl( \bigcup_{A_{ij}^c \in \mathcal{F}} A_{ij}^c \Bigl)^c \in \mathcal{F}
\end{align*}

$$
So, that means that we can write the elements of $f(\mathcal{F} \cup
H)$ as $(A \cap H) \cup (B \cap H^c)$, where $A$ and $B$ are the union
of the sets above, $m$ where we take the union of
the sets that have a nonempty intersection with $H$ and assign them to
$A$ and the union of the sets that have nonempty intersection with
$H^c$ and put them in $B$.


## Problem 2.8

Let $\mathcal{C}$ be a class over $\mathcal{A}$ such that
$\mathcal{C}$ is closed under formation of countable unions and
intersections. We show $\sigma(\mathcal{A}) \subset \mathcal{C}$. We
already know that since $\sigma(\mathcal{A})$ is a $\sigma$ -field, it
contains all countable unions and intersections because of how it is
defined. Since $A^c$ is a countable union of elements in
$\mathcal{A}$, $A^c \in \mathcal{C}$ (note that $A^c \in
\sigma(\mathcal{A})$ because $\sigma(\mathcal{A})$ is a field). This
implies $\emptyset, \Omega \in \mathcal{C}$ as well. Hence,
$\sigma(\mathcal{A}) \subset \mathcal{C}$.


## Problem 2.9

BACKLOG


## Problem 2.10

Part A: Let $\omega, \omega' \in \Omega$ and $\omega \ne
\omega'$. Suppose for the sake of contradiction that all $A \in
\mathcal{A}$, $I_A(\omega) = I_A(\omega')$. Consider the set
$\{\omega\}$. Since $\sigma(\mathcal{A})$ contains every subset of
$\Omega$, $\{\omega\} \in \sigma(\mathcal{A})$. First suppose that
$\{\omega\} \in \mathcal{A}$. Then, because $\omega' \not\in
\{\omega\}$, it follows that $I_{\{\omega\}}(\omega) = 1 \ne 0 =
I_{\{\omega\}}(\omega')$. This contradicts our assumption, though, so
we conclude that $\{\omega\} \not\in \mathcal{A}$. Define:
$$

\begin{align*}
B &= \cap_{\omega \in A, A \in \sigma(\mathcal{A})} A \\
&\supset \cap_{\omega \in A, A \in \mathcal{A}} A
\end{align*}

$$
Note that $B = \{\omega\}$ since $\sigma(\mathcal{A})$ contains every
subset of $\Omega$ and hence includes $\{\omega\}$. Let $C =
\cap_{\omega \in A, A \in \mathcal{A}} A$. Since $\omega \in A$ for
every $A$ in the intersection that defines $C$, $\omega' \in A$ as
well. So, $\{\omega, \omega'\} \subset C$. But $C \subset B = \{\omega\}$. This is a contradiction.


## Problem 2.11

Part A: Let $\mathcal{A}$ be the class of sets for the form $(a, b]$ where $a,
b \in \mathbb{Q}$. This generates $\mathcal{B}$, the $\sigma$ -field
of Borel sets. For any irrational endpoints, we can always find a
sequence of rational endpoints that converge to them.

Part B: Let $\mathcal{F}$ be the countable and cocountable sets (so
$\mathcal{F}$ is a $\sigma$ -field). Suppose $\Omega$ is countable. We
show $\mathcal{F}$ is countably generated. All the countable sets in
$\mathcal{F}$ countably generate $\mathcal{F}$ since the complement
would be a subset of $\Omega$ which is countable. Therefore, all the
subsets of $\Omega$ are countable and cocountable, so $\mathcal{F}$ is
countably generated. We now show that $\mathcal{F}$ being countably
generated implies that $\Omega$ is countable (BACKLOG for other direction).


## Problem 2.12

Let $\mathcal{F}$ be a countably infinite $\sigma$ -field. A $\sigma$
-field $\mathcal{F}$ satisfies (i) $\Omega \in \mathcal{F}$ , (ii) If
$A \in \mathcal{F}$, $A^c \in \mathcal{F}$, (iii) For any sequence
$\{A_n\}_{n=1}^\infty$, $\cup_{n=1}^\infty A_n \in \mathcal{F}$. Since
$\mathcal{F}$ is countably infinite, we may enumerate the sets in
$\mathcal{F}$ as $A_1, A_2, A_3, \dots$. Since we can choose to
include an element in the union or not (i.e, we can choose $A_k$ or
$\emptyset$), the cardinality of the countable unions of all sets in
$\mathcal{F}$ will be $2^{|\mathbb{N}|}$ since there are $|\mathbb{N}|$
such sets in $\mathcal{F}$. But all the possible countable unions of sets in
$\mathcal{F}$ is itself in $\mathcal{F}$, so $\mathcal{F}$ has
cardinality $2^{|\mathbb{N}|}$. Therefore, since $2^{|\mathbb{N}|}$ is
strictly larger than $|\mathbb{N}|$, $\mathcal{F}$ is not countably
infinite. We can show that fields can be countably infinite, even
though $\sigma$ -fields can't: let $\mathcal{F}$ be the class of sets
which are finite disjoint unions of subintervals of $\Omega = [0, 1)$
with rational endpoints. This is a countably infinite field (since the
rationals are countably infinite and this field is a subset of
$\mathcal{B}_0$). However, it is not a $\sigma$ -field.


## Problem 2.13

Part A: Note that if $\Omega$ is infinite, every set is finite and
cofinite, so $P$ is not well-defined. Now, let $A_1, \dots A_N$ be
$\mathcal{F}$ -sets that are disjoint. We show that $P(\cup_{n=1}^N
A_n) = \sum_{n=1}^N P(A_n)$. Suppose $\cup_{n=1}^N A_n$ is
finite. Then, $P(\cup_{n=1}^N A_n) = 0$. Also, each of the $A_n$ must
be finite, so $P(A_n) = 0$. Now, suppose $\cup_{n=1}^N A_n$ is
cofinite. Then, $P(\cup_{n=1}^N A_n) = 1$. We show that exactly one of
the $A_k$ is cofinite. We know that at least one of the $A_k$ is
cofinite since otherwise $P(A_n) = 0$ for all $n$. Suppose WLOG $A_1$
and $A_2$ are cofinite, for the sake of contradiction. Then, $A_1 \cap
A_2 = \emptyset$. Also, $A_1^c and A_2^c are finite$. However, $A_1^c
\cup A_2^c = \Omega$, which is infinite. This is a contradiction, so
there is exactly one cofinite set, and $\sum_{n=1}^N P(A_n) = 1$.

Part B: Let $\Omega = \mathbb{N}$. Let $A_n = \{n\}$ for all $n \in
\mathbb{N}$. Then, $P(\cup_{n=1}^\infty A_n) = P(\Omega) =
1$. However, $P(A_n) = 0$. So, $P$ is not countably additive.

Part C: Suppose $\Omega$ is uncountable. We show that for disjoint
$\mathcal{F}$ -sets $\{A_n\}_{n=1}^\infty$, $P(\cup_{n=1}^\infty A_n)
= \sum_{n=1}^\infty P(A_n)$. Suppose first that $\cup_{n=1}^\infty
A_n$ is finite. Then, $P(\cup_{n=1}^\infty A_n) = 0$. Each $A_n$ must
be finite so that $\sum_{n=1}^\infty P(A_n) = 0$ (because each $P(A_n)
= 0$). Now suppose $\cup_{n=1}^\infty A_n$ is cofinite, so that
$P(\cup_{n=1}^\infty A_n) = 1$. For the sake of contradiction, suppose
that $\sum_{n=1}^\infty P(A_n) = 0$. Then, since $P(A_n) = 0$ or $P(A_n) =
1$, $P(A_n) = 0$ for all $n \in \mathbb{N}$. But this is only the case
if $A_n$ is finite. Then, $\cup_{n=1}^\infty A_n$ is countably
infinite, since it the union of countably many finite sets. Since
$\Omega$ is uncountable, this implies that $\Omega \setminus
\Bigl(\bigcup_{n=1}^\infty A_n\Bigl) = \cap_{n=1}^\infty A_n^c$ is
uncountable. But $\cup_{n=1}^\infty A_n$ is cofinite, so
$\cap_{n=1}^\infty A_n^c$ is finite. This is a contradiction, so
$\cup_{n=1}^\infty P(A_n) = 1$.

Part D: Let $\{A_n\}_{n=1}^\infty$ be a collection of disjoint
$\mathcal{F}$ -sets. Suppose $\cup_{n=1}^\infty A_n$ is
countable. Then, $P(\cup_{n=1}^\infty A_n) = 0$. Then each $A_n$ must
be countable or finite since otherwise $\cup_{n=1}^\infty A_n$ would
be uncountable. Then, $\sum_{n=1}^\infty P(A_n) = 0$ since each
$P(A_n) = 0$. Now, suppose $P(\cup_{n=1}^\infty A_n) = 1$, so that
$\cup_{n=1}^\infty A_n$ is cocountable. Suppose for the sake of
contradiction that $\sum_{n=1}^\infty P(A_n) = 0$. Then, each $P(A_n)
= 0$, so each $A_n$ is countable. However, this implies that
$\cup_{n=1}^\infty A_n$ is countable since it is the union of
countably many countable sets. So, it is both countable and
cocountable. However, its complement $\Omega \setminus
\Bigl(\bigcup_{n=1}^\infty A_n\Bigl) = \cap_{n=1}^\infty A_n^c$ is
also countable. Then, if we take the union of both $\cup_{n=1}^\infty
A_n$ and its complement, since the union is of countably many
countable sets, we find that $\Omega$ is countable. This contradicts
the fact that $\Omega$ is uncountable.


## Problem 2.14

We show that $\mathcal{F}$ is a $\sigma$ -field. Note that $\emptyset$
is a nowhere-dense set because for every open interval $I$, take any
open interval $J \subset I$. Then, $J \cap \emptyset = \emptyset$. So,
$\emptyset$ is of the first category. Then, $(0, 1]^c = \emptyset$, so
$(0, 1] \in \mathcal{F}$ provided that $\mathcal{F}$ is closed under
complements, which we show now: let $B = A^c$. Since $B^c = A$, $B^c$
is either of the first category or a complement of a set of the first
category, so $B$ must be as well, which implies $A^c \in
\mathcal{F}$. Finally, let $\{A_n\}_{n=1}^\infty$ be a sequence of
disjoint $\mathcal{F}$ -sets. Let $A = \cup_{n=1}^\infty A_n$. We can
write $A = B \cup C$ where $B$ consists of all $A_n$'s that are of the
first category and $C$ consists of all $A_n$'s that are complements of
sets of the first category. Then, $B$ is a countable union of
nowhere-dense sets (since each term in its union is a countable union
of nowhere-dense sets), so $B \in \mathcal{F}$. Write $C = \cup_n A_n$
where each $A_n$ is a complement of a set of the first category. Let
$A_n = B_n^c$, where $B_n$ is of the first category. So, $C =
\Bigl(\bigcap_n B_n\Bigl)^c$. We can write each $B_n =
\cup_{m=1}^\infty C_{n,m}$ where $C_{n,m}$ is nowhere dense. Then,
$\cap_n \cup_{m=1}^\infty C_{n,m}$ can be written as a union of
intersections of nowhere-dense sets using the distributive property,
and since the intersections are nowhere dense (intersections of
nowhere-dense sets are nowhere-dense), the union is countable and of
nowhere-dense sets. So, $C \in \mathcal{F}$.

Now, we show that $P(\cup_{n=1}^\infty A_n) = \sum_{n=1}^\infty
P(A_n)$ where $A_n \cap A_m \ne \emptyset$ for $n \ne m$ and $P(A_n) =
0$ or $1$ if $A_n$ is of the first category or complement of a first
category set. Suppose that $P(\cup_{n=1}^\infty A_n) = 0$. Then,
$\cup_{n=1}^\infty A_n$ is of the first category. For every open
interval $I$, there exists subinterval $J \subset I$ such that $J \cap
\bigcup_{n=1}^\infty A_n = \bigcup_{n=1}^\infty (J \cap A_n) =
\emptyset$. This implies $J \cap A_n = \emptyset$ for all $n \in
\mathbb{N}$. Therefore, each $A_n$ is of the first category, so
$\sum_{n=1}^\infty P(A_n) = 0$. Suppose that $P(\cup_{n=1}^\infty A_n)
= 1$. So, $\cup_{n=1}^\infty A_n$ is a complement of a set of the
first category. We show there exists exactly one $A_m$ such that
$P(A_m) = 1$. We know there is at least one $A_m$ that is a complement
of a set of the first category (otherwise $\cup_{n=1}^\infty A_n$
would be of the first category, which contradicts our assumption). Now
suppose there is more than one set that is a complement of a set of
the first category. Write $\cup_{n=1}^\infty A_n = \bigcup_{n \in I}
A_n \cup \bigcup_{n \in I^c} A_n$ where $I \subset \mathbb{N}$ and
consists of the indices $n$ for which $A_n$ is a complement of a set
of the first category. Then, let $A_n = B_n^c$ where $B_n$ is a set of
the first category. Recall that $A_n \cap A_m = B_n^c \cap B_m^c =
\emptyset$ for all $n \ne m$. So, $\cap_{n \in I} B_n^c =
\emptyset$. So, $\cup_{n \in I} B_n = (0, 1]$. Since $B_n$ is a set of
the first category for all $n \in I$, $(0, 1]$ must be of the first
category as well. But we know that $\emptyset = (0, 1]$ is a
complement of a set of the first category. So, there is at most one
set which is a complement of a set of the first category. That is,
$\sum_{n=1}^\infty P(A_n) = 1$.


## Problem 2.15

Let $\{A_n\}_{k=1}^m$ be a sequence of $\mathcal{B}_0$ sets that are
pairwise disjoint. We show that $P(\cup_{k=1}^m A_k) = \sum_{k=1}^m
P(A_k)$. First, suppose $P(\cup_{k=1}^m A_k) = 0$. Then, for every
$\epsilon > 0$, $(\frac{1}{2}, \frac{1}{2} + \epsilon] \not\subset
\cup_{k=1}^m A_k$. This implies that $(\frac{1}{2}, \frac{1}{2} +
\epsilon] \not\subset A_k$ for all $k \in [m]$. Therefore, $P(A_k) =
0$, so $\sum_{k=1}^m P(A_k) = 0$. Now suppose that $P(\cup_{k=1}^m
A_k) = 1$. Then, for some $\epsilon_A > 0$, $(\frac{1}{2},
\frac{1}{2} + \epsilon] \subset A = \cup_{k=1}^m A_k$. Since each
$A_k$ is a finite disjoint union of intervals, we can write $A$ as a
finite disjoint union of intervals. Then, WLOG, we can take each $A_k$
to be an interval in $\mathcal{B}_0$. Let $A_k = (a_k, b_k]$, where
each $a_k < b_k$ for all $k \in [m]$. Let $a_i = \min_{1 \le k \le m}
a_k$. Then, $a_i \le \frac{1}{2}$, because if $a_i > \frac{1}{2}$,
then $a_k > \frac{1}{2}$ for all $k \in [m]$, which would imply that
$(\frac{1}{2}, \frac{1}{2} + \epsilon_A] \not\subset A$ because
$(\frac{1}{2}, a_i] \not\subset A$. Let $\epsilon = b_i -
\frac{1}{2} > 0$. Then, $(\frac{1}{2}, \frac{1}{2} + \epsilon] \subset
(a_i, b_i]$. Since the sets $A_k$ are disjoint, $A_i$ is the only set
containing $(\frac{1}{2}, \frac{1}{2} + \epsilon]$, so $\sum_{k=1}^m
P(A_k) = 1$. Let $A_n = (\frac{1}{2} + \frac{1}{2^{n+1}},
\frac{1}{2} + \frac{1}{2^n}]$. The collection $\{A_n\}_{n=1}^\infty$
is disjoint but $\cup_{n=1}^\infty A_n = (\frac{1}{2}, 1]$. So,
$P(\cup_{n=1}^\infty A_n) = 1$, but $P(A_n) = 0$ for all $n \in
\mathbb{N}$, so $\sum_{n=1}^\infty P(A_n) = 0$.


## Problem 2.16

Part A: Consider the sets $\{A_n\}_{n=1}^\infty$. For all $n \in
\mathbb{N}$, $A_t \subset A_n$ for all $0 < t \le n$. So,
$\cup_{n=1}^\infty A_n = \cup_{t > 0} A_t = A$. Furthermore, we can
see that $A_n \uparrow A$ since $A_n \subset A_{n+1}$. We can apply
Theorem 2.1(i) to get that $P(A_n) \uparrow P(A)$. Since $t
\rightarrow \infty$ as $n \rightarrow \infty$, $P(A_t) \uparrow
P(A)$. Note that if $\mathcal{F}$ is a $\sigma$ -field, then
$\cup_{t > 0} A_t = \cup_{n=1}^\infty A_n \in \mathcal{F}$.

Part B: Based on part A, $P(A_t) \uparrow P(A)$ implies that $1 -
P(A_t^c) \uparrow 1 - P(A^c)$. This implies that $P(A_t^c) \downarrow
P(A^c)$. This extends Theorem 2.1(ii).


## Problem 2.17

Let $B_1 = A_1$ and $B_k = A_k \setminus \cup_{j=1}^{k-1} A_j$. Then,
$\cup_{k} A_k = \cup_k B_k$ and $B_k \cap B_j = \emptyset$ for all $k
\ne j$. So:
$$

\begin{align*}
P(\cup_{k} A_k) = P(\cup_{k} B_k) = \sum_k P(B_k)
\end{align*}

$$
Next:
$$

\begin{align*}
P(A_k) &= P\Bigl((A_k \cap \bigcup_{j=1}^{k-1} A_j) \cup (A_k \cap \Bigl(\bigcup_{j=1}^{k-1} A_j\Bigl)^c) \Bigl) \\
&= P(\cup_{j=1}^{k-1} (A_k \cap A_j)) + P(A_k \setminus \cup_{j=1}^{k-1} A_j)
\end{align*}

$$
Evaluating the first term with finite subadditivity:
$$

\begin{align*}
P\Bigl(\cup_{j=1}^{k-1} (A_k \cap A_j) \Bigl) \le \sum_{j=1}^{k-1} P\Bigl(A_k \cap A_j\Bigl) = 0
\end{align*}

$$
So, $P\Bigl(\cup_{j=1}^{k-1} (A_k \cap A_j) \Bigl) = 0$ and,
continuing from before:
$$

\begin{align*}
P(A_k) = P(A_k \setminus \cup_{j=1}^{k-1} A_j) = P(B_k)
\end{align*}

$$
So,
$$

\begin{align*}
P(\cup_{k} A_k) = \sum_k P(A_k)
\end{align*}

$$


## Problem 2.18

Part A: Let $\{A_k\}_{k=1}^N$ and $A_k \cap A_j = \emptyset$ for all
$k \ne j$. Then:
$$

\begin{align*}
D(\cup_{k=1}^\infty A_k) &= \lim_{n \rightarrow \infty} P_n(\cup_{k=1}^N A_k) \\
&= \lim_{n \rightarrow \infty} \sum_{k=1}^\infty P_n(A_k) & \text{$P$ is a probability measure} \\
&= \sum_{k=1}^N \lim_{n \rightarrow \infty} P_n(A_k) \\
&= \sum_{k=1}^N D(A_k)
\end{align*}

$$
This shows finite additivity of $D$. To show $D$ is not countably
additive, consider the singletons $\{n\}$ for all $n \in \mathbb{N} =
\Omega$. Then $D(\{n\}) = \lim_{m \rightarrow \infty} \frac{I_{m <
n}}{n} = 0$. However, $\cup_{n=1}^\infty \{n\} = \Omega$ and $D(\Omega
= 1)$.

Part B: We have that $D(\emptyset) = \lim_n P_n(\emptyset) = \lim_n 0
= 0$. And, $D(\Omega) = \lim_n P_n(\Omega) = \lim_n 1 = 1$. Let $A \in
\mathcal{D}$. Then, $D(A) = \lim_{n \rightarrow \infty} P_n(A)$. Since
$P_n(A)$ is a discrete probability measure, $P_n(A^c) = 1 -
P_n(A)$. So, $D(A^c) = \lim_{n \rightarrow \infty} P_n(A^c) = \lim_{n
\rightarrow \infty} (1 - P_n(A)) = 1 - \lim_{n \rightarrow \infty}
P_n(A) = 1 - D(A)$ exists whenever $D(A)$ exists, so $A^c \in
\mathcal{D}$. Let $B \subset A$, with $A, B \in \mathcal{D}$. Then:
$$

\begin{align*}
D(A \setminus B) &= \lim_{n \rightarrow \infty} P_n(A \setminus B) \\
&= \lim_{n \rightarrow \infty} \frac{\#\{m: 1 \le m \le n: m \in A \setminus B \}}{n} \\
&= \lim_{n \rightarrow \infty} (P_n(A) - P_n(B)) \\
&= D(A) - D(B)
\end{align*}

$$
Now, let $A$ and $B$ be disjoint $\mathcal{D}$ -sets. Then, $D(A \cup
B) = \lim_{n \rightarrow \infty} P_n(A \cup B) = \lim_{n \rightarrow
\infty} P_n(A) + \lim_{n \rightarrow \infty} P_n(B)$ since $P_n$ is a
probability measure. If the two limits in the last sum exist, then $A
\cup B \in \mathcal{D}$. Now, let $\{n\}$ be the singletons where
$\Omega = \mathbb{N}$. As shown in Part (A), this shows that $D$ is
not countably additive. Now, we show that $D$ is not closed under
finite unions that are not disjoint. Let $A$ be the even integers. Let
$C_k = \{m: 2^k < m \le 2^{k+1}\}$. Let $B$ consist of the even
integers in $\bigcup_{j \in \mathbb{N}} C_{2j - 1}$ and of the odd
integers in $\bigcup_{j \in \mathbb{N}} C_{2j}$, which we denote $E$
and $F$, respectively, so that $B = E \cup F$. Then, $A \cap E = A$
and $A \cap F = \emptyset$. So, $A \cap B = A \cap \bigcup_{j \in
\mathbb{N}} C_{2j-1}$. Because the $A \cap C_{2j-1}$ are disjoint for
all $j \in \mathbb{N}$, we get that:
$$

\begin{align*}
P_{2j-1}\Bigl(A \cap B \Bigl) &= \frac{1}{2^{2j-1}} \sum_{k=1}^j \#\Bigl(A \cap C_{2k-1}\Bigl) \\
P_{2j}\Bigl(A \cap B \Bigl) &= \frac{1}{2^{2j}} \sum_{k=1}^j \#\Bigl(A \cap C_{2k}\Bigl)
\end{align*}

$$
However, using the Ratio test:
$$

\begin{align*}
\limsup_{j \rightarrow \infty} \frac{P_{2j}\Bigl(A \cap B \Bigl)}{P_{2j-1}\Bigl(A \cap B \Bigl)} = 2 > 1
\end{align*}

$$
So it diverges. Then, $A \cap B \not\in \mathcal{D}$. Note that $A \in
\mathcal{D}$ and $B \in \mathcal{D}$ (because $D(B) = \frac{1}{2}$).


## Problem 2.19

BACKLOG


## Problem 2.20

BACKLOG


## Problem 2.21

BACKLOG


## Problem 2.22

BACKLOG

